[Translation] "Art to tell a story" (or about (over)interpretation) (Walter Benjamin, November 1933)

I always come back to this short essay written by Benjamin, because I think it so beautifully compresses the whole problem with "interpreting" that what we still not even understand what it is. Therefore, I thought it might be useful to translate it here, so that you may weigh in on how well it is readable in English.

References: Selected Works, WBG 2018, tomb V, p.464 = collected works Suhrkamp tomb IV.2 p. 430ff (according to page index at the end of WBG t.V)
online: https://www.textlog.de/benjamin/kleine-prosa/denkbilder/kleine-kunst-stuecke

Walter Benjamin - Think-Images - Short Art Pieces - The Art to tell a story

"Every morning teaches us about the new things encompassing the earth. And yet we are poor in rememberable stories. How come? It comes, because no occurence reaches us, that isn't already sipped through with explanation. In other words: Almost nothing, what happens, comes to the benefit of the [telling of the] story, almost everything to benefit or information. Because it is already half of the art to tell a story, to keep it, while telling it, free from explanation. In that, the old were masters, Herodotus on the cusp. In the 14th chapter of the third book of his "Histories" there is the story of Psammenit. As the Egyptian king Psammenit was defeated and imprisoned by the Persian king Kambyses, Kambyses sought to humiliate the prisoner. He gave orders, to put Psammenit on the street through which the Persian parade was to move. And he further ordered, that the prisoner should see his daughter as a servant, that would go with the vase to the well. As all Egyptians mourned and decried this theater, Psammenit alone stood wordless and unmoving, the eyes to the ground, and as he shortly later saw his son, taken with the parade to his execution, he still was unmoved. But as he recognized one of his servants, an old poor man, in the lines of the prisoners, then he punched the head with his fists and gave all signs of the deepest sorrow. ---
In this story one can see, what it is about the true [telling of the] story. Information has lost its value in the moment, that it was new. It lives in that instant. It has to extradite itself to [that moment] and, without loosing time, to explain itself. [Completely] different the [telling of the] story; it doesn't overexhaust itself. It keeps its power collected in the inside and is after a long time capable of being expanded. So, Montaigne came back to the one about the Egyptian king and asked himself: Why does he only mourn on the sight of the servant and not before? Montaigne answered: "Because he was already full of grief, it needed only the smallest addition, and it broke his dams." That's a way to understand it. It does however also have room for other explanations. Everyone can make themselves familiar with them, who asked Montaigne's question in their circle of friends. One of mine said for example: "The king is not moved by the fate of the royal, for that is his own." Or another one: "We're moved by a lot on stage, which doesn't move us in real life; the servant is an actor to the king." Or a third one: "Great pain accumulates and only breaks away by relaxation. The sight of the servant was the relaxation" - "If this story would happen today", said a fourth one, "in all papers would be written that Psammenit liked the servant more than his kids." Sure is, that every reporter would explain it in an instant. Herodotus explains it with no word. His report is the driest. Therefore, this story from Ancient Egypt, is after millennia still able to inspire wonder and thought. It is similar to the seeds of plants, that have laid for millennia cut off from the air in the chambers of the pyramids, and have to this very day not lost the power to grow."
